# Mortality Prediction in ICU 

#### Patients admitted to the ICU suffer from critical illness or injury and are at high risk of dying. ICU mortality rates differ widely depending on the underlying disease process. The risk of death can be approximated by evaluating the severity of a patient’s illness as determined by important physiologic, clinical, and demographic determinants.
#### In clinical practice, estimates of mortality risk can be useful in triage and resource allocation, in determining appropriate levels of care, and even in discussions with patients and their families around expected outcomes. Estimates of mortality risk are, however, based on studying aggregate data from large, heterogeneous groups of patients, and as such their validity in the context of any single patient encounter cannot be assured. This shortcoming can be mitigated by personalized mortality risk estimation, which is well discussed in, but is not a subject of the present study.
#### Perhaps even more noteworthy uses of mortality prediction in the ICU are in the areas of health research and administration, which often involve looking at cohorts of critically ill patients. Traditionally, such population-level studies have been more widely accepted as applications of mortality prediction given the cohort-based derivation of prediction models. In this context, mortality prediction is used to compare the average severity of illness between groups of critically ill patients (for example, between patients in different ICUs, hospitals, or health care systems) and between groups of patients enrolled in clinical trials. Predicted mortality can be compared with observed mortality rates for the purpose of bench marking and performance evaluation of ICUs and health systems.3
#### The following demographic/administrative variables were extracted to be used as predictors: age at ICU admission, gender and admission type (elective, urgent, emergency. Furthermore, the first measurement in the ICU of the following vital signs and lab tests was each extracted as a predictor: heart rate, blood pressure , body temperature, SpO2, respiratory rate, and cause of admission. Although the very first measurements in the ICU were extracted, the exact measurement time with respect to the ICU admission time would have varied between patients. Also, this approach to variable-by-variable data extraction does not ensure concurrent measurements within patient. For the vast majority of the ICU admissions in data, however, measurements of these common clinical variables were obtained at the beginning of the ICU admission, or at most within the first 24 hours.
#### As the patient outcome to be predicted, mortality outcome variable can be obtained by comparing the death (yes or no) using various Classification and ANN models for prediction.
